>>> ON THIS EDITION FO
SATURDAY, JANUARY 25th
EVEN AS THE WAR RAGES ON, SYRIAN
PEACE TALKS BEGAN IN
SWITZERLAND.
WHY THE WORLD'S EMERGING MARKETS
COULD BE A MAJOR CONCERN FOR
AMERICAN INVESTORS
AND WILLIAM BRANGHAM WITH A RARE
LOOK INSIDE IRAN
>> PRICES FOR CONSUMER GOODS AND
EVERYDAY ITEMS HAVE GONE THROUGH
THE ROOF
AT THE VERY SAME TIME THAT THE
VALUE OF THE MONEY PEOPLE US
HERE, THE REAL, HAS COMPLETELY
PLUMMETED.
>> NEXT ON PBS "NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
>> GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
FOR THE FIRST TIME SINCE THE
CIVIL WAR IN SYRIA BEGAN
REPRESENTATIVES OF SYRIA
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL ASHAUD'S
REGIME AND SOME OF THE REBEL
TRYING TO OUST HIM HEL
FACE-TO-FACE PEACE TALKS TODAY
THAT CONFLICT HAS LED TO A
ESTIMATED 130,000 DEATHS
ITV REPORTS FROM GENEVA.
>> Reporter: THERE WAS A SENSE
OF PURPOSE ABOUT THE WAY THE
DELEGATIONS WALKED IN GENEVA
THIS MORNING
THIS WAS THE DAY THE TALKS
FINALLY GOT SERIOUS.
THROUGH THE HOSTILITY,
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE WARRING
SIDES IN SYRIA WERE ON THEIR WAY
TO SIT DOWN AND FACE EACH OTHE
IN THE SAME ROOM
>> WE SHALL START WITH MODES
IDEAS.
AND WE HOPE WE BUILD ON THEM
ACHIEVE SOMETHING, AND THEN MOVE
GRADUALLY TO BIGGER AND BIGGER
ISSUES
>> Reporter: INSIDE THE PALACE
OF NATIONS, IT WAS THE U.N
SPECIAL ENVOY, LAKDAR BRAHIMI,
WHO CHAIRED AND DID MOST OF TH
TALKING AT THE FIRST MEETING
>> THE TWO SIDES ENTERED THE
NEGOTIATING ROOM BY SEPARATE
DOORS.
ONE OF THE NEGOTIATORS TOLD ME
THE ATMOSPHERE INSIDE WAS LIKE A
COURTROOM WITH THE TWO SIDES
COMMUNICATING WITH EACH OTHE
VIA THE JUDGE.
THE U.N. MEDIATOR.
THE MAIN EFFORTS AT THE START OF
THE TALKS IS TO TRY TO ESTABLISH
LOCAL CEASE-FIRES IN PLACES LIKE
HOMS TO ALLOW AID TO GET THROUGH
TO THE CIVILIAN POPULATION
>> OUR DELEGATION IS PASSIONATE.
>> CAN YOU GUARANTEE YOU CAN
STOP OPPOSITION FIGHTERS
FIGHTING IN HOMS, GUARANTEE TO
GET THEM TO PUT DOWN THEIR GUNS?
>> IF THERE IS AGREEMENT REACHED
WE CAN GUARANTEE THAT, YES
>> Reporter: AT THE END OF A
SECOND TWO-HOUR MEETING THIS
AFTERNOON, MR. BRAHIMI WAS
FRANK.
>> WE HAVEN'T ACHIEVED MUCH.
BUT WE ARE CONTINUING.
>> Reporter: THEY MAY NOT HAVE
FOUND COMMON GROUND TODAY, BUT
GIVEN THE ANIMOSITY BETWEEN TH
TWO SIDES, THE FACT THAT THE
ARE STILL HERE AND STILL LOOKING
DOES COUNT AS PROGRESS
>>> THERE WAS MORE VIOLENC
THROUGHOUT EGYPT TODAY ON TH
THIRD ANNIVERSARY OF THE
OVERTHROW OF HOSNI MUBARAK
AT LEAST 25 WERE KILLED DURING A
SERIES OF CLASHES BETWEE
SUPPORTERS OF THE MILITARY
GOVERNMENT AND INFAMOUS BACKER
OF THE DEPOSED, POPULARL
ELECTED MOHAMED MORSI.
THERE WERE 4 THAN 400 ARRESTS.
A CAR BOMB EXPLODED OUTSIDE
POLICE FACILITY IN SUEZ CITY
WOUNDING NINE.
>>> IN AFGHANISTAN PRESIDENT
HAMID KARZAI SAID AGAIN HE WIL
NOT IMMEDIATELY SIGN A SECURIT
DEAL WITH THE UNITED STATES THAT
WOULD KEEP AMERICAN FORCES THERE
PAST THE END OF THE YEAR
>> Translator: AFGHANISTAN WIL
NEVER SIGN THE SECURIT
AGREEMENT UNDER PRESSURE
IF AMERICA WANTS TO STAY AS AN
ALLY WITH US, WORK WITH US AS AN
ALLY, NOT AS AN OPPONENT
WE AFGHANS KNOW THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN AN ALLY AND AN OPPONENT,
CLEARLY, AND THIS DIFFERENCE I
OBVIOUS IN THE WORLD TOO
>> NEARLY 2,300 MEMBERS OF THE
U.S. MILITARY HAVE BEEN KILLED
IN AFGHANISTAN SINCE 2001.
>>> IN UKRAINE A MAJOR POLITICAL
CONCESSION FROM THE GOVERNMENT
PRESIDENT VICTOR YANUKOVYC
OFFERED TO NAME A TOP OPPOSITION
LEADER PRIME MINISTER, FOLLOWING
WEEKS OF PROTESTS AFTER TH
GOVERNMENT REFUSED TO MOVE AHEAD
ON A DEAL STRENGTHENING TIES
WITH THE EUROPEAN UNION DECIDING
TO DEEPEN TIES WITH RUSSIA
INSTEAD.
CLASHES BETWEEN PROTESTERS AND
POLICE TURNED VIOLENT AN
PROTESTERS BEGAN BLOCKING AN
OCCUPYING SEVERAL GOVERNMENT
BUILDINGS.
>>> THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMEN
HAS REACHED AN AGREEMENT TO EN
DECADES OF FIGHTING WITH MUSLI
REBEL GROUPS THAT LED TO A
ESTIMATED 150,000 DEATHS
THE POWER-SHARING DEAL WITH TH
ISLAMIC LIBERATION FRONT I
DESIGNED TO LEAD TO AN AREA OF
MUSLIM SELF-RULE IN THE SOUTHERN
PART OF THE NATION
IN EXCHANGE FOR
DECOMMISSIONING OF REBEL FORCES.
THE FIGHTING HAS LASTED MORE
THAN 40 YEARS.
>>> THERE'S BEEN A CLASH BETWEEN
AUTHORITIES AND RESIDENTS OF A
REGION IN WESTERN CHINA WITH A
LARGE MUSLIM POPULATION.
AUTHORITIES SAY AT LEAST 1
PEOPLE IN THE PROVINCE WER
KILLED AFTER A SERIES OF
BOMBINGS AND AN EXCHANGE O
GUNFIRE.
THE AREA IS HOME TO MOST O
CHINA'S 10 MILLION ETHNI
UIGHURS, MOST OF WHOM PRACTICE
ISLAM AND HAVE REPEATEDLY BEEN
AT ODDS WITH THE NONMUSLIM
POPULATION THERE
THE DEATH COUNT HAS RISE
FOLLOWING A FIRE IN A RETIREMENT
HOME IN CANADA
AUTHORITIES NOW SAY 32 SENIO
CITIZENS ARE PRESUMED DEAD
FOLLOWING A THE BLAZE IN THE
PROVINCE OF QUEBEC
THE SEARCH FOR MORE BODIES I
CONTINUING IN FRIGID CONDITIONS.
MANY OF THE RESIDENTS WERE MOR
THAN 85 YEARS OLD AND USED
WALKERS AND WHEELCHAIRS.
>>> IN THIS COUNTRY ANOTHE
SHOOTING INCIDENT.
THREE WERE KILLED AND FOUR
INJURED AFTER A GUNMAN OPENE
FIRE AT A MALL IN COLUMBIA
MARYLAND, 30 MILES NORTH OF TH
NATION'S CAPITAL
THE GUNMAN REPORTEDLY SHOT
HIMSELF DEAD AFTER KILLING TWO
OTHERS
>>> THE FAMILY OF AN OHIO INMATE
WHOSE EXECUTION LASTED LONGE
THAN EXPECTED HAS FILED
LAWSUIT SAYING DENNIS McGUIR
WRITHED IN PAIN DURING THE 2
MINUTES IT TOOK DF HE DIED
HE WAS LETHALLY INJECTED WITH
COMBINATION OF DRUGS NEVER
BEFORE TRIED IN THE U.S.
THE LAWSUIT ALSO SAYS THAT THE
DRUG MANUFACTURER SHOULD B
PROHIBITED FROM MAKING THE DRUGS
AVAILABLE FOR CAPITA
PUNISHMENT
>>> IN TEXAS, A JUDGE HA
ORDERED A HOSPITAL TO REMOVE A
BRAIN-DEAD PREGNANT WOMAN FROM
LIFE SUPPORT, DESPITE ITS EFFORT
TO SAVE HER FETUS.
STATE LAW PROHIBITS TH
WITHDRAWAL OF TREATMENT FROM A
PREGNANT PATIENT, HOWEVER, THE
JUDGE RULED THAT MARLISE MUNOZ
IS DEAD AND THE HOSPITAL HAD
BEEN MISAPPLYING THE LAW
ERIC MUNOZ SAYS HIS WIFE WOULD
NOT HAVE WANTED TO BE KEPT O
LIFE SUPPORT
THE HOSPITAL ACKNOWLEDGED IN
COURT DOCUMENTS THAT THE FETUS
IS NOT VIABLE.
IT HAS UNTIL MONDAY EVENING TO
REMOVE MUNOZ FROM LIFE SUPPORT
>>> AND WORD THAT SCIENTISTS
HAVE DISCOVERED A NEW SPECIES OF
RIVER DOLPHIN, THE FIRST
DISCOVERY OF ITS KIND IN ALMOS
100 YEARS.
ACCORDING TO A PUBLISHED REPOR
IN A SCIENCE JOURNAL THE NE
MARINE MAMMAL FOUND IN THE
AMAZON BASIN IN BRAZIL SEPARATED
FROM OTHER COL FINS 2 MILLIO
YEARS AGO.
RIVER DOLPHINS ARE AMONG THE
RAREST IN THE WORLD.
>>> WE WANT TO SPEND TIM
TALKING ABOUT THE GLOBAL
MARKETS.
FOLLOWING A HUGE RUN-UP IN STOCK
PRICES DURING THE PAST YEAR,
MOST MAJOR MARKETS REVERSE
COURSE LATE THIS WEEK AN
SUFFERED THEIR BIGGEST DECLINE
SINCE 2012
FOR MORE ABOUT WHAT CONTRIBUTE
TO THAT REVERSAL WE'RE JOINE
NOW FROM WASHINGTON, HELP US
UNPACK WHAT HAPPENED IN TH
STOCK MARKET THE LAST COUPLE O
DAYS
WHAT CONTRIBUTED TO THIS
>> WELL, INVESTORS ARE REACTIN
TO A WHOLE SET OF GLOBAL FORCE
THAT ARE ALL COLLIDING AT ONCE
IN THE UNITED STATES, TH
FEDERAL RESERVE IS STARTING TO
PULL BACK ON ITS EXTREME
MONETARY POLICY.
THAT'S PUSHING INTEREST RATE
UP
THAT'S A VERY DIFFICUL
ADJUSTMENT FOR A NUMBER OF
EMERGING ECONOMIES THAT HAD SEEN
A FLOOD OF MONEY COME INTO THEIR
MARKETS AS A RESULT OF LOW
INTEREST RATES AROUND THE WORLD.
SO IN TURKEY, FOR INSTANCE
THEY'RE GOING THROUGH A FAIR
AMOUNT OF POLITICAL INSTABILITY.
AND COMBINED WITH THE MOVES BY
THE FED, INVESTORS ARE STARTIN
TO FLEE.
NOBODY WANTS TO BE LEFT THER
HOLDING AN INVESTMENT THAT'S
GOING TO TURN BAD VERY QUICKLY
YOU'RE SEEING A SIMILAR FORCE IN
SOUTH AFRICA, IN BRAZIL, EVE
ARGENTINA, WHICH HAS BEEN A BI
OF AN ECONOMIC MESS.
INVESTORS IN THE UNITED STATES
ARE LOOKING AT THIS AN
WONDERING WHETHER GLOBAL GROWT
IS GOING TO HOLD UP, WHETHER THE
ENTIRE GLOBAL ECONOMY IS GOING
TO BE ABLE TO BE PROPELLED B
SOME OF THE FORCES THAT HAVE
BEEN PROPELLING IT FOR THE LAS
FIVE YEARS
>> OKAY.
THERE WAS ALSO A MANUFACTURING
REPORT IN CHINA.
WHY WAS THAT SO SIGNIFICANT?
>> THAT WAS SIGNIFICANT BECAUS
CHINA OF COURSE IS THE SECON
LARGEST ECONOMY IN THE WORLD
AND THERE HAVE BEE
LONG-STANDING FEARS ABOUT WHAT
WILL HAPPEN AS CHINA TRIES T
REBALANCE ITS ECONOMY.
IT'S TRYING TO SHIFT FROM BEIN
A BIG EXPORTER TO PROVIDING MORE
OF ITS ECONOMIC GROWTH FRO
HOME, FROM ITS OWN CITIZENS.
AND AS IT DOES THAT, IT'
STARTING TO DO THIS ADJUSTMENT
AND THERE ARE OTHER PROBLEMS I
CHINA LIKE A BIG PROPERTY BUBBLE
THAT LEADS TO DEFLATE AND IT
LEADERSHIP KNOWS IT NEEDS TO
DEFLATE.
WHEN CHINA HAS BEEN A GROWTH
ENGINE FOR THE WORLD AND THA
STARTS TO PULL BACK IT MAKES
EMERGING MARKETS VERY NERVOUS,
IT MAKES DEVELOPED ECONOMIES
NERVOUS, BECAUSE THE UNITE
STATES AND EUROPE ARE SELLIN
INTO CHINA NOT JUST BUYING
PRODUCTS FROM IT
>> BESIDES THE DECISION BY THE
FED TO RAISE INTEREST RATES HERE
AND CHINESE MANUFACTURING WHAT'S
TRIBUTE TOGETHER ARGENTINEAN
CURRENCY OR THE TURKISH CURRENCY
TO DEVALUE SO QUICKLY AGAINS
THE DOLLAR
>> WELL, YOU'RE SEEING A
REVERSAL AMONG INVESTORS I
ARGENTINA BECAUSE THEY'VE HAD SO
MANY PROBLEMS SINCE ITS CURRENCY
CRISIS IN 2001, 2002
INVESTORS AREN'T REALLY GIVING
THEM THE BENEFIT OF THE DOUBT AT
ALL AND FLEEING VERY QUICKLY
TURKEY HAS ITS OWN ISSUES.
AND PEOPLE ARE PULLING OUT O
THERE.
THE BIG QUESTION NOW IS WHETHE
THESE RISKS ARE DEALT WITH A
EMERGING MARKETS AS A WHOLE AN
INVESTORS TREAT THEM ALL ALIKE
OR WHETHER THEY START TO
DISTINGUISH BETWEEN OTHE
ECONOMIES, MEXICO FOR INSTANCE
IS AN EMERGING ECONOMY THA
WOULD HAVE BEEN WRECKED BY
SOMETHING LIKE THIS BEFORE BUT
IT'S IN A MUCH BETTER POSITION
NOW.
SO WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO WATC
OVER THE COMING WEEKS WHETHE
INVESTORS CAN HANDLE
UNDERSTANDING THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN SOME OF THESE ECONOMIES.
>> SO IS WHAT HAPPENED YESTERDAY
SOMETHING JUST A SHORT-TER
REACTION
AND TO PUT THATPERSPECTIVE
IT'S ONLY A 2% DROP COMPARED T
A 30% SORT OF POSITIVE YEAR.
>> IT IS A VERY SHORT-TERM
REACTION
WE CAN'T GET AHEAD OF THINKING
THIS IS GOING TO BE A LONG SLIDE
DOWN
IT'S CERTAINLY POSSIBLE THIS
WOULD BE THE BEGINNING STAGES OF
A CURRENCY CRISIS.
BUT WE'VE GONE THROUGH MOMENTS
LIKE THIS BEFORE AND GONE PAST
THEM FAIRLY EASILY
BUT THERE HAVE BEEN A LOT OF
FORCES BUILDING UP
AND IT'S NOT REALLY CLEAR TO
INVESTORS HOW SOMETHING LIKE
THIS SETTLES OUT
THESE ARE A LOT OF FORCES THAT
YOU HAVEN'T ACTUALLY SEEN COME
TOGETHER LIKE THIS BEFORE.
CERTAINLY FROM THE FED AND WHA
YOU'RE SEEING IN CHINA AND A
NUMBER OF THESE BIGGER EMERGIN
MARKETS.
IT'S AN UNUSUAL ADJUSTMENT FOR
INVESTORS AND FOR MARKETS.
SO WE NEED TO WATCH WHETHER THIS
RICOCHETS THROUGH OTHER MARKET
OR WHETHER WE START TO SEE
INVESTORS GET A LITTLE CALME
AND NOT OVERREACT TO SOME OF
THESE MOVES.
>> ALL RIGHT
FROM WASHINGTON, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU
>>> TONIGHT IN OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, A RARE PEEK INSID
IRAN
NEWS COVERAGE OF THAT COUNTRY OF
80 MILLION PEOPLE IS TYPICALLY
LIMITED TO IRAN'S EFFORT T
DEVELOP A NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
AND THE WESTERN SANCTION
DESIGNED TO HALT THAT.
TONIGHT, SOMETHING DIFFERENT
"NEWSHOUR" CORRESPONDENT WILLIAM
BRANGHAM SPENT TWO WEEKS IN IRAN
AND WHILE THERE REPORTED
EXTENSIVELY ABOUT THE EFFECTS OF
THOSE SANCTIONS.
HE ALSO GOT A LOOK AT OTHE
PARTS OF LIAR, CONSUMERISM
ENTREPRENEURSHIP, CENSORSHIP
THE IMPRISONMENT OF POLITICA
DISSIDENTS
I BEGAN BY ASKING HIM WHETHE
THOSE SANCTIONS LIMITING IRAN'
OIL EXPORTS AND ACCESS TO TH
INTERNATIONAL BANKING SYSTEM
SEEM SO CRIPPLING ON THE STREETS
OF IRAN.
>> Reporter: IF YOU HADN'T TOL
ME BEFORE I CAME HERE THAT IRA
HAS UNDER THIS "CRIPPLIN
SANCTIONS" REGIME, YOU WOULD
HAVE NO IDEA FROM WALKING AROUND
ON THE STREETS
THE STREETS ARE PACKED, TRAFFI
EVERYWHERE
THE STORES ARE FULL, THE GROCERY
STORES ARE PACKED WITH GOODS
SO ON THE SURFACE, YOU REALL
HAVE NO SENSE OF THIS COUNTRY IS
UNDER THIS REGIME OF SANCTIONS
THAT SAID, AT A MARKET I
NORTHERN TEHRAN, WE MET
54-YEAR-OLD SHOP OWNER, HIS NAME
IS HAMID, AND HE OWNS A STOR
THAT SELLS SOAP AND TOILETRIES
AND CLEANING PRODUCTS.
HE SAID THE REAL PROBLEM WIT
THE IRANIAN ECONOMY IS
INFLATION.
AND IN FACT, ACROSS THE COUNTRY,
PRICES FOR CONSUMER GOODS AN
EVERYDAY ITEMS HAVE GONE THROUGH
THE ROOF
AT THE VERY SAME TIME THAT THE
VALUE OF THE MONEY THE PEOPL
USE HERE, THE REAL, HA
COMPLETELY PLUMMETED
HE TOLD ME THE PRICES OF THE
PRODUCTS IN HIS SHOP, EVER
SINGLE ONE OF THEM, HAVE DOUBLED
OR TRIPLED IN THE LAST COUPLE OF
YEARS.
JUST ONE EXAMPLE, HE SAID THAT A
DOVE BAR OF SOAP, A SINGLE BAR
OF SOAP, A FEW YEARS AGO COS
ABOUT 1,500 REALS.
NOW THAT SAME BAR OF SOAP COST
5,000 REAL S
THIS MAKES IT DIFFICULT FO
CUSTOMERS TO BUY AS MUCH AS THEY
USED TO AND HIS BUSINESS HAS
SUFFERED
>> THAT INFLATION IS CONNECTED
TO ECONOMIC SANCTIONS.
ARE ALL IRANIANS FEELING
PINCHED?
>> Reporter: THE MIDDLE CLAS
AND UPPER MIDDLE CLASS AND
WEALTHY IN IRAN HAVE BEEN DOIN
VERY WELL.
AND THERE'S EVIDENCE OF THAT
EVERYWHERE
WE WENT INTO ONE ELECTRONICS
BAZAAR IN THE MIDDLE OF DOWNTOWN
TEHRAN
IT WAS LIKE AN ELECTRONICS
BAZAAR OUT OF NEW YORK CITY.
YOU COULD NOT BELIEVE THE AMOUNT
OF PRODUCTS THAT WERE AVAILABL
FOR SALE
APPLE PRODUCTS, SAMSUNG, THE
LATEST MOBILE PHONES
I MEAN, IT WAS A REMARKABL
SIGHT TO SEE
INSIDE THIS MALL, ONE STOR
OWNER WHO SELLS MOSTLY MAC
PRODUCTS TOLD ME HE HAS
SPECIAL BLUE TOOTH HEADSET, TH
LATEST THING HE SAID, IT'S ONL
AVAILABLE ACCORDING TO HIM A
APPLE STORES IN NEW YORK CIT
AND HIS STORE AT THIS MALL I
TEHRAN
SO A FAIRLY GOOD SIGN OF
AFFLUENCE GOING ON IN CERTAI
PARTS OF IRANIAN SOCIETY
WE HAD A FAIRLY INTERESTIN
EXPERIENCE WHEN WE WERE IN THI
MALL
WHILE WE WERE WALKING AROUND I
THE HALLWAY, THE EVENING CALL TO
PRAYER FROM THE LOCAL MOSQUE WAS
PIPED THROUGH THE LOUD SPEAKER
IN THE MALL.
HERE WE WERE IN THIS MOMENT,
PEOPLE GAWKING OVER ALL TH
LATEST iPHONES AND iPADS, YE
YOU HEAR THIS THOUSAND YEAR OL
TRADITION, THE CALL TO PRAYE
COMING THROUGH THE LOU
SPEAKERS
IT WAS A COLLISION OF CULTURES
WHERE THIS ANCIENT TRADITION I
BUTTING UP AGAINST THE PINNACL
OF WESTERN CONSUMERISM
>> ARE THE SANCTIONS LEADING T
SHORTAGES?
SAY, FOR EXAMPLE, MEDICINE
>> Reporter: WE WENT TO
HOSPITAL IN DOWNTOWN TEHRAN.
IT'S ACTUALLY A JEWISH CHARITY
HOSPITAL IN THE MIDDLE OF TH
CITY
AND THERE WE MET A DOCTOR, A
FASCINATING CHARACTER, THIS BIG,
BURLY, CHAIN-SMOKING, JEWISH
DOCTOR
YES, THERE ARE ABOUT 30,000 JEWS
IN IRAN.
HE'S WORKING IN A JEWISH
HOSPITAL THAT'S CATERING MOSTL
TO LOWER AND MIDDLE CLAS
IRANIANS IN TEHRAN
IN HIS OFFICE HE HAS PORE TRAITS
OF AYATOLLAH KHOMENEI ON ONE
SIDE, AND MOSES AND HIS BROTHE
ON THE OTHER
VERY, VERY INTERESTING GUY
HE DESCRIBED TO US, YES, BECAUSE
OF SANCTIONS HE HAS HAD A VERY
DIFFICULT TIME GETTING A LOT O
THE MEDICATIONS THAT HE NEED
FOR HIS PATIENTS
AND HE SAID IT'S NOT SO MUCH
THAT THERE'S PROHIBITIONS ON
SELLING THE MEDICINES, PER SE.
IN FACT, U.S. TREASURY
DEPARTMENT OFFERS EXEMPTIONS FOR
THOSE THINGS
HE SAYS IT'S BECAUSE THAT TH
FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS THAT AR
PROHIBITED BY SANCTIONS MEAN
THAT WESTERN PHARMACEUTICA
COMPANIES FOR THE MOST PART WILL
NOT DO BUSINESS WITH IRANIAN
FIRMS.
AND SO THERE'S SHORTAGE OF VER
SPECIFIC DRUGS HE HAS A VERY
HARD TIME GETTING AND HE SAI
IT'S REALLY A PROBLEM.
>> DID YOU MEET OTHER PEOPLE WHO
SAID THEY WERE AFFECTED BY THE
SANCTIONS?
>> Reporter: YEAH, WE DID SEE
FEW EXAMPLES
ONE OF THOSE EXAMPLE WET FOUND
IN THE CITY OF ISFAHAN, TH
ANCIENT CAPITAL, A FIVE TO
SIX-HOUR DRIVE SOUTH OF TEHRAN
AND THERE WE MET A YOUNG MAN
WHOSE NAME IS ROGHANI.
HE HAS AN ADVANCED DEGREE IN
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
HE USED TO WORK IN THE AUT
INDUSTRY, HIS FAMILY BUSINES
MADE PARTS FOR MOTORS.
SANCTIONS HAD VERY SPECIFICALL
TARGETS I RAN'S AUTOMOBILE
INDUSTRY
AND SO A LOT OF JOBS HAD BEE
LOST AND THAT INDUSTRY HAS
REALLY SORT OF BEEN CONTRACTED
QUITE CONSIDERABLY
SO THIS YOUNG MAN GETS OUT O
THAT BUSINESS AND HE JOINS HIS
FATHER'S SHOE BUSINESS
SO HE IS NOW A MECHANICA
ENGINEER USING HIS SKILLS TO
DESIGN AND MANUFACTURE NEW
SHOES.
HE MAKES THESE VERY COOL BLU
WING TIP SHOES AND THINGS LIKE
THAT
>> SO MANY AMERICANS HAVE HEAR
THAT THE IRANIAN GOVERNMEN
CENSORS THE INTERNET
IN YOUR TIME THERE, WHAT DID YOU
SEE?
>> Reporter: THE INTERNET IS
HEAVILY REGULATED.
THE GOVERNMENT HAS STRINLG
CONTROLS OVER WHAT SITES YOU CAN
VISIT AND CAN'T VISIT.
IF YOU TRY TO ACCESS A SITE THAT
IS BLOCKED, TWITTER OR FACEBOOK,
WHAT POPS UP IS THIS GOVERNMEN
WEBSITE THAT SAYS, THIS SITE I
BLOCKED, AND OFFERS THIS HELPFUL
LIST OF OTHER WEBSITES YOU MIGHT
PREFER TO VISIT INSTEAD.
MOST IRANIANS, HOWEVER, CAN GE
AROUND THIS BY USING WHAT AR
KNOWN AS VPNs, VIRTUAL PRIVATE
NETWORKS
AND IT BASICALLY ALLOWS YOU TO
CREATE YOUR OWN SMALL INTERNET
OUT OF YOUR OWN COMPUTER
IT ALLOWS YOU TO BYPASS A LOT OF
THESE RESTRICTIONS
THE LOGIC BEHIND THE
GOVERNMENT'S CENSORSHIP OF THE
INTERNET ISN'T TOTALLY CLEAR AND
IT DOESN'T ALWAYS MAKE SENSE
SOMETIMES THERE'S SOME STRANGE
INCONSISTENCIES IN THE WAY THE
ENFORCE IT
FOR EXAMPLE, NPR IS BLOCKED.
BUT PBS ISN'T.
NBC NEWS IS NOT BLOCKED.
ABC NEWS IS.
SO IT'S SOMETIMES HARD T
UNDERSTAND EXACTLY WHAT'S GOIN
ON THERE
>> I READ THAT SOCIAL MEDI
SITES LIKE TWITTER AND FACEBOO
ARE CENSORED AS WELL
>> Reporter: THE IRONY ABOUT
BLOCKING TWITTER AND FACEBOOK IN
IRAN IS THAT THE CURRENT
ADMINISTRATION, ROUHANI'
ADMINISTRATION, ARE SOME OF TH
MOST ACTIVE USERS OF SOCIA
NETWORKS AMONG THE GOVERNMENT IN
THE PAST
ROUHANI HAS AN ACTIVE TWITTE
ACCOUNT, THE FOREIGN MINISTE
HAS A FACEBOOK PAGE, THEY'RE
CONSTANTLY POSTING MESSAGES ON
THERE.
A GUY NAMED JACK DORSEY, ONE O
THE FOUNDERS OF TWITTER, HE SENT
PRESIDENT ROUHANI A TWEET SAYING
BASICALLY, MR. PRESIDENT, GLAD
YOU'RE USING TWITTER, BUT CA
THE PEOPLE OF IRAN ACTUALLY READ
YOUR TWEETS?
PRESIDENT ROUHANI IN HIS STYLE
WROTE BACK VERY CASUALLY, GOOD
EVENING, JACK, IN A TWEET, THE
BASICALLY DIDN'T ANSWER TH
QUESTION
>> WHAT'S BEHIND THE
GOVERNMENT'S DESIRE TO CENSO
SOCIAL MEDIA
>> Reporter: SOME BELIEVE THAT
THE CENSORSHIP OF THESE SOCIAL
NETWORKING SITES IN PARTICULAR
STEM FROM THE 2009 PROTEST
WHICH TOOK PLACE ALL OVER IRAN
AFTER PRESIDENT AHMADINEJAD'
LAST HEAVILY CONTESTED ELECTION.
AND TWITTER ESPECIALLY WAS USE
TO HELP GET THE WORD OUT ABOUT
RALLIES AND MARCHES AND EVENTS
IT'S BELIEVED THAT PART OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S DESIRE TO CENSO
THE INTERNET IS SO THAT THEY CAN
STOP THAT KIND OF -- WHAT THEY
THINK OF AS DISSENT FROM GETTING
OUT THERE.
>> YOU SAID YOU MET A MAN THER
WHO WAS PART OF THOSE PROTESTS
>> Reporter: SAID LELAZ, A
PROMINENT IRANIAN ECONOMIST AN
JOURNALIST
WE WENT TO TALK TO HIM
PRINCIPALLY TO TALK ABOUT TH
IMPACT OF SANCTIONS ON THE
ECONOMY.
BUT SEVERAL YEARS AGO, SAID WA
ALSO INVOLVED IN ELECTIO
PROTESTS AND HE WAS CONVICTED BY
AHMADINEJAD'S GOVERNMENT AND
SENT TO THE NOTORIOUS EBEN
PRISON, WHICH LOOMS LARGE IN THE
IRANIAN IMAGINATION, IT WAS
PRISON BUILT BY THE SHAH, PEOPLE
HAVE BEEN EXECUTED AND TORTURED.
HE SPENT FOUR YEARS IN THA
PRISON, INCLUDING SOLITARY
CONFINEMENT, IN A VERY SMALL
CELL
AT THE END OF OUR INTERVIEW WE
WENT TO HIS PRACTITIONER AND O
THE WALL WE SAW THIS WOODE
CARVING.
SAID TOLD US THIS WAS A GIFT,
HANDMADE GIFT, FROM A PRISONER
HE MET INSIDE PRISON
AND HE TOOK IT DOWN OFF THE WALL
AND HE READ THE INSCRIPTION TO
US
IT SAYS, "AS YOU PASS THROUG
THIS DESERT OF TERROR, PASS IT
IN GOOD HEALTH
WHEN YOU REACH THE BLOSSOMS AN
THE RAIN, GIVE THEM OU
GREETINGS.
SAID SAID, HERE'S A MESSAGE FO
EVERYONE FROM A PRISONER INSID
ONE OF IRAN'S NOTORIOUS PRISONS.
>> HAVE YOU SEEN OR FELT
ANTI-AMERICANISM WHILE YOU'V
BEEN THERE
>> Reporter: NO.
NONE AT ALL.
OUR INTERACTIONS WITH IRANIANS
ACROSS THE BOARD HAVE BEEN
OVERWHELMINGLY POSITIVE.
PEOPLE ARE GENUINELY CURIOUS
ABOUT THE UNITED STATES.
THERE'S JUST NOT THAT MANY
WESTERNERS THAT COME THROUGH
HERE
ESPECIALLY AMERICANS
SO WE'RE KIND OF VIEWED AS A BIT
OF A RARE BIRD HERE.
PEOPLE WANT TO KNOW, WHAT IS
AMERICA LIKE
WHAT DOES AMERICA THINK OF IRAN?
THEY WANT TO OFFER THEIR
IMPRESSIONS AND SO -- OU
INTERACTIONS HAVE BEEN
INCREDIBLY POSITIVE.
THE FEW INSTANCES THAT YOU D
SEE IT, AND I THINK IT DOE
EXIST IN IRANIAN SOCIETY, WE
JUST HAVEN'T COME ACROSS IT.
THE FEW INSTANCES WHERE WE'V
SOON TOUCHES OF IT ARE IN THES
MORE OFFICIAL VERSIONS OF IT
FOR EXAMPLE, THERE ARE MURAL
ALL OVER TEHRAN.
YOU SEE THESE FACES EVERYWHERE
YOU GO, LOOKING DOWN ON YOU.
HUGE, HUGE FACES
MOST OF THEM ARE EITHER TH
AYATOLLAHS, THE FORMER O
CURRENT.
INTELLECTUAL LEADERS OF TH
ISLAMIC REVOLUTION
OR HEROES OF THE 1980s IRAN/IRAQ
WAR, VOLUNTEERS OR FAMIL
MEMBERS WHO WENT TO FIGHT TH
IRAQIS
THE ONLY MURAL THAT I SAW THAT
HAD ONE TOUCH OF
ANTI-AMERICANISM WAS THIS ONE.
IN IT, PRESIDENT OBAMA IS BACK
TO BACK WITH ONE OF THE SORT O
MOST FAMOUS VILLAINS FROM SHIITE
ISLAM.
THIS IS A GUY WHO IS BELIEVED TO
HAVE MURDERED, IN COLD BLOOD
THE GRANDSON OF THE PROPHE
MOHAMMAD
AND THIS -- THE MURAL IS
BASICALLY INDICATING THAT OBAM
IS LIKE THIS GUY
HIS HAND MAY BE OUTSTRETCHED I
A GESTURE OF FRIENDLINESS, BUT
YOU CAN'T TRUST HIM.
>> WILLIAM BRANGHAM FROM DAY
HAN, THANKS SO MUCH.
HE'LL HAVE AN IN-DEPTH REPORT ON
THE EFFECTS OF THE SANCTIONS FOR
THE WEEKDAY "NEWSHOUR" IN TH
COMING WEEKS
>>> SEE MORE IMAGES FROM INSID
IRAN
VISIT US AT NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG
>>> THIS IS PBS "NEWSHOU
WEEKEND SATURDAY."
>>> AND NOW, WHAT YOU HAD TO SAY
ABOUT US
COMMENTS WE RECEIVED AFTER OUR
BROADCAST LAST WEEKEND FRO
VIEWERS LIKE YOU
MOST OF WHAT WE HEARD FOCUSED ON
OUR REPORT FROM INDIA ABOUT THAT
COUNTRY'S LITTLE-KNOWN BUT
AMBITIOUS SPACE PROGRAM.
A SOURCE OF PRIDE AN
CONTROVERSY IN THAT NATION O
1.2 BILLION PEOPLE
WE POSTED THE STORY ONLINE WIT
THE HEADLINE, "IS INDIA'S SPAC
PROGRAM WORTH THE MONEY?
A NUMBER OF YOU WROTE BACK
SAYING, THE UNITED STATES MIGH
WANT TO ASK THAT OF ITSELF
CLAY SHOTT WENT TO OUR WEBSITE
AND WROTE, ARI COULD HAV
CERTAINLY POINTED OUT TH
PARALLEL BETWEEN THE POINTS HE'S
RAISING AND THE VERY SAME POINTS
RAISED BY CRITICS OF THE U.S
SPACE PROGRAM IN THE 1950s
JOHN PENNERELLI WROTE ON
FACEBOOK, THE UNITED STATES HA
A HUGE HOMELESS POPULATION A
WELL AS MILLIONS WHO LIVE IN
POVERTY.
YET WE SPEND THOUSANDS OF TIME
WHAT INDIA SPENDS ON THEIR SPACE
PROGRAM.
WE ARE NOT IN A POSITION T
CRITICIZE INDIA.
MANY READERS AGREED WITH WALTE
WHEN HE WROTE, I DON'T THINK A
NATION'S SCIENCE PROGRAMS ARE AN
ECONOMIC ISSUE
IT'S MORE A PROBLEM OF POLITICAL
WILL
BESIDES, THE PAYBACK FOR
SPENDING MONEY ON SCIENTIFIC
EXPLORATION IS PHENOMENAL.
MOST OF OUR MODERN ELECTRONICS
CAN BE ATTRIBUTED TO THESE
PROGRAMS
WE HEARD SOMETHING SIMILAR FRO
JOHNNY LAY ON OUR SITE
HE SAID, YOU CAN'T ELIMINATE
POVERTY WITH $70 MILLION, BU
YOU CAN INSPIRE MILLIONS T
STUDY, TO BE MORE THAN WHO THE
CURRENTLY ARE.
FINALLY FROM INDIA WE HEAR
THIS
I DON'T UNDERSTAND WHY INDIANS
GIVING INTERVIEWS AND JUSTIF
HOW WE SPEND OUR MONEY
FEEL FREE TO SEND US YOU
THOUGHTS EITHER THROUGH TH
COMMENT SECTION BELOW OU
STORIES, AT NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG, ON
OUR FACEBOOK PAGE, OR TWEET US
BACK @NEWSHOUR
>>> JOIN US TOMORROW, ON-AIR AND
ONLINE
TRYING TO SOLVE TH
ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEM OF FOO
WASTE.
>> FOOD NOW REPRESENTS THE
BIGGEST COMPONENT OF SOLID
MUNICIPAL WASTE THAT MAKES ITS
WAY TO LANDFILLS
FOOD WASTE CONVERTS TO METHANE
A GREENHOUSE GAS THAT'S AT LEAST
25 TIMES MORE POWERFUL IN GLOBAL
WARMING THAN CARBON DIOXIDE.
>> THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.